+++
date = "2016-02-01"
title = "Almost Surely: musings on statistics, science, and computing"
+++

"Reading maketh a full man; conference a ready man; and writing an exact man."
In these few words, Francis Bacon captured the notion that writing is requisite
for the formulation of consistent and ordered thoughts.

In applying this principle here, I aim to pen my thoughts with careful attention
paid to the maximization of their clarity and consistency -- that is, here, I
mean to slow down, organize, and explore my thinking on those topics that most
readily capture my attention. The goal ultimately is to combat -- or, failing
that, at least escape -- the fast-paced and unstructured style of thinking
unfortunately encouraged by our modern ease of access to both information and
opinions. In escaping this deluge of external opinions, it is my hope that the
thoughts produced here will be informed singularly by those experiences and
schools of thought that have shaped my way of thinking. Here, I plan to discuss
exciting ideas and breakthroughs in applied statistics, data science, scientific
computing, and the biomedical sciences.

The name of this blog is taken from various ideas in stochastic convergence
theory -- in particular, "almost surely" is intended as a reference to the
notion of [almost sure
convergence.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convergence_of_random_variables#Almost_sure_convergence)

Though this choice of title emerged rather whimsically, it now seems quite
fitting given the nature of the topics to which I have chosen to dedicate this
blog -- what will hopefully be a mixture of interesting, modern ideas from
theoretical statistics, applied statistics (in particular, biostatistics), data
science, causal inference, information theory, scientific computing, and, to a
more limited extent, the biomedical sciences.
